Let's assume that our sample is
exactly normally distributed.
Whether this is because we're willing to
stomach that assumption because we have
a large sample size and we're
applying the central limit theorem or
if we're willing to just assume that
the underline population is exactly
normally distributed.
Either way, for the sake of argument let's
assume that X bar is normally distributed,
and that sigma, the standard
deviation of the population is known.
Then we would reject if our z statistic,
x bar minus 30 over it's standard
error is bigger than z1 minus alpha.
This is the same as just saying we're
going to reject if x bar is bigger than 30
plus this z quantile times
the standard err of the mean.
Now notice under the null hypothesis
X bar follows this distribution.
Normal with a mean equal to mu naught.
In this case 30.
And the variance equal
to sigma squared over N.
Under the alternative it
follows the same distribution.
The only difference is instead
of mu naught we have mu a.
Where mu a is the value
under the alternative.
So it's very easy to write out in r,
what our power would be.
We want to take pnorm of
the probab in other words,
the normal probability of
getting a sample mean.
Mu naught plus z times
sigma over square root n or
larger, where this probability simply
calculated with mu equal to mu a.
So here we have mean mu, mean equal
to mu a, our standard deviation is
the standard error of the mean, and
I've put lower.tail equals false.
So that I get the upper probability.
Now notice if I were to plug in mu equal
to mu naught then I should get alpha, and
now as I plug as mu
a moves away from alpha
the power should get larger and larger.
So let's try it.
Suppose someone were to give me this
information that they wanted to conduct
this study, they wanted to test whether or
not mu was 30 for
this population or it was larger than 30.
So mu naught equals 30.
They were interested
a difference as large as 32,
their end was 16,
that they were hoping to get, and
they knew that sigma was around 4.
Okay?
So here I've plugged in the values
mu naught equal 30, mu a equals 32,
sigma equals 4, n equals 16, here's my
z is my normal quintile, and then first
I want to show you if I plug in mu equal
to mu naught that it should give me 5%.
So here I plug in mu equal
to mu naught and I get 5%.
Now I'm plugging in mu equal to mu a 32,
and you see that this jumps up to 64%.
So, there's a 64% probability of
detecting a mean as large as 32 or
larger if we conduct this experiment.
So here I'm plotting the power curves,
which is the power as a function of Mu a,
as n varies by color here, and.
As we head to the right on this plot,
so as we head along this axis,
that's mua getting bigger,
and this axis is power.
Okay?
So let's take a specific one
of these lines and look at it.
So this line, right here,
is the power when n equals a.
And what you can see is all of the lines,
is including the one that we're discussing
right now,
converge at 0.05 as mu approaches 30.
And then what you can see is that
power increases as mu a gets larger.
Okay?
And basically that means we're more likely
to detect a difference if the difference
we want to detect is very big.
And that makes a lot of sense.
If something's a huge effect,
we should be very probably,
it should be very probably to detect it.
And then the other thing I would
note is that as we head up here,
we're seeing sample sizes doubled with
each line, I start out with N equal to 8,
then I move to N equal to 16 right there
and then 32 and then 64 and then 128.
And what you can see is the curves
all getting shoved up to higher and
higher power earlier and earlier.
And this makes a lot of sense as well.
In other words, as we collect a lot
more data, we should be more likely
to detect a power of a var, of a specific,
for a specific value of mu a.
And so that's why, the mu n equal
to 128 curve is uniformly above.
The N equal to 64 curve, and so on.
Let's use our studio's manipulate function
to evaluate power as it relates
to the two normal densities.
So here I'm going to
do library manipulate,
then I'm going to define mu0 to be 30.
Then I'm going to define a plotting
function that depends on the population,
standard deviation, the mean under
the alternative, the sample size,
and the type-1 error rate.
Then it does ggplot.
So, I'm,
then it's going to execute that plot.
But it's going to give me a slider so
that I can vary all of these parameters.
Let me first describe these two plots
before we start using manipulate function.
Currently the parameters are set at
the values we've used in the previous
calculations.
Sigma was 4.
Mu a was 32, n was 16 and alpha was 5%.
So what this plot is saying is
under the null hypothesis here's
the distribution of our sample mean.
It's centered at 30 and
it has a variance of sigma squared over n.
Under the alternative.
It's centered at 32 and
it has a variance of sigma squared over n.
We've set a critical value, so
that if we get a sample mean that's
larger than a specific threshold
we reject the null hypothesis.
That's this line.
We set this line such that the
probability, if the red density is true,
the null hypothesis is true this area,
the probability of getting
statistics larger than it is 5%.
Now power is
nothing other than the probability
of getting larger than this
line which is calibrated to have
this area under the red curve is 5%.
The probability that we reject if
in fact the blue curve is true.
That's the power.
Here's 1 minus the power or
the type two error rate.
Okay.
Now let's start varianting and,
and see what happens.
So if we move it so that its all the way
down at 1% that's just saying that this
area right here under the red curve
needs to be 1, calibrated to be 1%.
At, as we move it down.
Let me just reiterate this point.
As we move it down its going to
move to the right like that.
But what's going to happen to power?
Power is going to go down.
Right?
This area is going down
as that thing moves.
And what's this,
what is this thing saying?
By moving alpha down we're making it
harder to reject a null hypothesis.
We're making the requirement
of having a lot more evidence.
Before we conclude
the alternative is true.
That simply re, results in less power.
Now it's also it's got a lower
type I error rate, but
a larger type II error rate,
and a lower power.
Okay, conversely.
If we increase alpha to
the highest level I set here,
now we have a 10% type one error rate but
we have much better power.
In other words, if we are willing to
be a little bit looser in how much,
when we reject, if we, you know, get
smaller means and we're still rejecting.
Then we'll get better power.
Of course we do have
a larger type I error rate.
10%, in this case, instead of 5%.
So let's set it back to 5%.
Let's see what happens
as we decrease sigma.
Sigma goes all the way down to 1.
Okay.
Now our black line moves.
Right.
Because I've, I've,
these are not standard normal curves.
These are, so our rejection region isn't
always so many standard errors from the,
from the mean in that,
instead we've decided to plot this on the,
on the scale of the problem.
So this black line then depends on sigma.
So as we move it, as we move sigma,
the black line moves with it.
Okay so let's move sigma down
to the lowest low, level I'm a,
allowing which is sigma
equal to 1 in this case.
Okay so our black line has moved down and
it's still calibrated so
that this area is 5%.
But what we've seen is we have so
little variability in the sample mean
that the probability of rejecting,
the probability of getting larger than
the black line, if the blue distribution,
alternative distribution,
is true, is almost 100%.
Okay, what happens if we move in the
opposite direction, we make SIGMA larger?
Well, here sigma very large.
Again we're still calibrated, so that this
area is 5%, but now power is much lower.
All this is saying, is that,
if we have a lot more
noise in our measurements,
then we're going to have lower power.
Let's try some more.
Let's set this back to what it was at for
the problem 4.
How about the mean under the alternative.
Let's make it bigger.
What happens?
Well, it just moves along.
Right?
It just moves along to the right and
now we get a lot more power.
And the black line doesn't depend on
the mean under the alternative, so
it doesn't move, and then as it moves
towards 30, you can see the power's
getting lower, and the lowest the power
can be is if it's, lies right on top of
the null distribution and then this,
the power'll be exactly point zero five.
Then it'll get a little bit bigger as it
moves further away and further away and
further away, until if we're at
35 we have almost 100% power.
Okay, let's set this back to 32, the value
that we're using for the problem.
How about n?
So, remember what happens as n increases.
Our sample mean gets less variable,
more observations go into our
sample mean it gets less variable.
So lets see what happens.
Okay?
Less variance, in our sample mean.
So these densities are getting tighter and
tighter.
Okay?
But the black line moves,
because remember,
we it's always gotta be calibrated.
It's always gotta be calibrated so
that this area is 5%.
But you can see now, we have a much better
power when we have a sample size of 50.
If we move it down to a sample size.
Very low and a four,
again the black is moved,
because it,
it has to force this area to be 5% and
now our power is quite low.
So I would highly recommend that you
go through the code for this manipulate
experiment to understand how power works
in this particular setting, it's, it's,
it's quite easy, but, basically, what you
can see is power has a bunch of knobs.
Oops.
And as you turn them,
the power changes in different ways,
and in the next slide, we'll summarize
the various aspects of power.
But using the manipulate
function like this,
you can actually experiment
with it your self.